# 2010 Resources

Routing inputs in this directory are based on the 2010 decennial Census. They can be used with either of the routing engines in the repository root.  

## Files

### `block/lat_lon_pop.csv.bz2`

Census block lon, lat, and population count. Sourced from the [Census FTP site](ftp://ftp.census.gov/geo/tiger/) and combined with CLI utilities. Used to calculate population-weighted centroids for different geographies.

- Locations come from the interior point fields (`INTPLON10` and `INTPLAT10`) of the [2010 TABBLOCK files](https://www2.census.gov/geo/tiger/TIGER2010/TABBLOCK/2010/)
- Populations come from the `POP10` field of the [2010 BLKPOPHU files](https://www2.census.gov/geo/tiger/TIGER2010BLKPOPHU/)

### `county/buffers.tar.gz`

Tarball of buffered 2010 county boundaries saved as GeoJSONs. Two buffer sizes are included:

* Files ending with `_100` are counties with a 100 km buffer and are used to find destinations locations
* Files ending with `_200` are counties with a 200 km buffer and are used to clip the OpenStreetMap network 

The street clipping buffer should be larger than the destination-finding buffer to ensure that destinations don't end up on street network islands created by the buffer clipping.

### `county/geoid_list.txt`

Headerless text list of all 2010 county GEOIDs in the United States. Does not include territories, PR, etc. Sourced from TIGER/Line files (via the [tigris R package](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/tigris/index.html)).

### `tract/pop_wtd_centroids.csv.bz2`

CSV of 2010 tracts generated by `scripts/01_generate_pop_weighted_centroids.R`. Contains the following fields:

- **id** - Full 2010 tract GEOID
- **acs_pop** - 2006-2010 American Community Survey population estimate
- **acs_moe** - 2006-2010 American Community Survey population estimate margin of error
- **block_pop** - Total 2010 Census block population, pulled from `block/lat_lon_pop.csv.bz2`
- **lon** - Population-weighted centroid longitude
- **lat** - Population-weighted centroid latitude
- **unroutable** - Boolean indicating the centroid is likely to be unroutable. For tracts, this usually means the centroid is a zero-population location corresponding to a tract that covers a lake or other body of water

### `tract/resources.tar.gz`

Tarball of 2010 Census tract origin and destination pairs, partitioned by county. Has the following structure when unpacked:

```
resources/
├── 17031/
│   ├── origins.csv 
│   └── destinations.csv 
├── 17037/
│   ├── origins.csv 
│   └── destinations.csv 
├── 17039/
...
```

## Scripts

### `scripts/01_generate_pop_weighted_centroids.R`

Script to convert `block/lat_lon_pop.csv.bz2` into population-weighted centroids for different geographies. Weighted centroids are calculated using the following steps:

1. Convert block lon/lat into meters ([Albers Equal Area](https://epsg.io/2163))
2. Determine which blocks are inside the target geography (using FIPS codes for tracts, spatial intersection for other geographies)
3. For each geography, calculate the mean block longitude and mean block latitude, weighting by block population
4. Convert the resulting population-weighted centroids back to lon/lat
5. Check that the each population-weighted centroid is inside the polygon boundary of its parent geography, if it is not, set the `unroutable` field to `TRUE` in the output CSV the target geography

### `scripts/02_generate_buffer_files.R`

Script to generate the GeoJSON buffer files saved in `county/buffers.tar.gz`. County boundaries are sourced from the 500k resolution TIGER/Line files (via the [tigris R package](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/tigris/index.html)).

### `scripts/03_create_origin_destination_files.R`

Script to generate origin and destination CSV files with `id,lat,lon` needed for routing. Files are partitioned by county and saved to their respective `${geography}/resources/` directory. `origins.csv` contains all geographic units whose population-weighted centroids lie within the county itself. `destinations.csv` contains all geographic units whose population-weighted centroids lie within the county's 100 km buffer.
